INSTALL.md, before:

## database setup

### pgsql/PostGIS setup

```
# should install postgresql 12 as a dependency
sudo apt install postgis
#might need: echo "listen_addresses = '*'" > /etc/postgresql/12/main/postgresql.conf

# dependencies for adddata.py
sudo apt install osm2pgsql
pip install psycopg2-binary
```

### per-database setup

```
cd db
./createdb.sh dbname
# automatically starts the database and adds a user 'za'

# populate the database
./adddata.py SOMEFILE.osm.pbf

./db.sh dbname start/stop
```

The bottleneck for all database operations is disk IO, so best to call adddata.py using the most compact format (e.g. OSM PBF). Best/fastest source for extracts: https://extract.bbbike.org

## Fonts

* Avenir Next Condensed Regular (https://gitlab.com/jeichert/fonts/-/blob/master/Avenir%20Next%20Condensed/AvenirNextCondensed-Regular.ttf)
* DIN Condensed
* .SF NS Text
* Assistant (Place+Station labels)

```

<!--
Setting up postgresql-12 (12.9-0ubuntu0.20.04.1) ...                                                                    Creating new PostgreSQL cluster 12/main ...                                                                             /usr/lib/postgresql/12/bin/initdb -D /var/lib/postgresql/12/main --auth-local peer --auth-host md5                      The files belonging to this database system will be owned by user "postgres".                                           This user must also own the server process.                                                                                                                                                                                                     The database cluster will be initialized with locale "C.UTF-8".                                                         The default database encoding has accordingly been set to "UTF8".                                                       The default text search configuration will be set to "english".         


syncing data to disk ... ok                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Success. You can now start the database server using:                                                                                                                                                                                               pg_ctlcluster 12 main start                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Ver Cluster Port Status Owner    Data directory              Log file                                                   12  main    5432 down   postgres /var/lib/postgresql/12/main /var/log/postgresql/postgresql-12-main.log                 update-alternatives: using /usr/share/postgresql/12/man/man1/postmaster.1.gz to provide /usr/share/man/man1/postmaster.1.gz (postmaster.1.gz) in auto mode                                                                                      invoke-rc.d: could not determine current runlevel 
-->

Commit message:

Improving database scripts and INSTALL instructions

INSTALL.md, after:

## database setup

### pgsql/PostGIS setup

```
# should install postgresql 12 as a dependency
sudo apt install postgis
#might need: echo "listen_addresses = '*'" > /etc/postgresql/12/main/postgresql.conf

# dependencies for adddata.py
sudo apt install osm2pgsql
pip install psycopg2-binary

# dependencies for layout.py
pip install pyproj
```

### per-database setup

```
cd db
./createdb.sh dbname
# automatically starts the database and adds a user 'za'

# populate the database
./adddata.py SOMEFILE.osm.pbf

./db.sh dbname start/stop
```

### data sources

* OSM data
  * The bottleneck for all database operations is disk IO, so best to call adddata.py using the most compact format (e.g. OSM PBF). Best/fastest source for extracts: https://extract.bbbike.org
* Coastline/sea water polygons
  * https://osmdata.openstreetmap.de/data/water-polygons.html


sudo apt install gdal-bin


## Fonts

* Avenir Next Condensed Regular (https://gitlab.com/jeichert/fonts/-/blob/master/Avenir%20Next%20Condensed/AvenirNextCondensed-Regular.ttf)
* DIN Condensed
* .SF NS Text
* Assistant (Place+Station labels)

```

<!--
Setting up postgresql-12 (12.9-0ubuntu0.20.04.1) ...                                                                    Creating new PostgreSQL cluster 12/main ...                                                                             /usr/lib/postgresql/12/bin/initdb -D /var/lib/postgresql/12/main --auth-local peer --auth-host md5                      The files belonging to this database system will be owned by user "postgres".                                           This user must also own the server process.                                                                                                                                                                                                     The database cluster will be initialized with locale "C.UTF-8".                                                         The default database encoding has accordingly been set to "UTF8".                                                       The default text search configuration will be set to "english".         


syncing data to disk ... ok                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Success. You can now start the database server using:                                                                                                                                                                                               pg_ctlcluster 12 main start                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Ver Cluster Port Status Owner    Data directory              Log file                                                   12  main    5432 down   postgres /var/lib/postgresql/12/main /var/log/postgresql/postgresql-12-main.log                 update-alternatives: using /usr/share/postgresql/12/man/man1/postmaster.1.gz to provide /usr/share/man/man1/postmaster.1.gz (postmaster.1.gz) in auto mode                                                                                      invoke-rc.d: could not determine current runlevel 
-->
